DOC-2342 (#659)
tigergraph/server-docs: modules/backup-and-restore/pages/point-in-time-restore.adoc

= Point-in-Time Restore

> The Point-in-time restore, introduced in version 4.1, enables users to restore their database to a specific time using backups made at earlier points, even if a backup was not created exactly at the desired time. This is particularly helpful when recovering from unwanted changes or data corruption, allowing users to restore the database without losing other work done after the last backup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Point-in-time restore, introduced in version 4.1, enables users to restore their database to a specific time using backups made at earlier points, even if a backup was not created exactly at the desired time. This is particularly helpful when recovering from unwanted changes or data corruption, allowing users to restore the database without losing other work done after the last backup.
```

> The Point-in-Time Restore feature, introduced in version 4.1, enables users to restore their database to a specific time using backups made at earlier points, even if a backup was not created exactly at the desired time. This is particularly helpful when recovering from unwanted changes or data corruption, allowing users to restore the database without losing other work done after the last backup.

Reviewer: Either "Point-in-Time Restore, introduced in version 4.1" or "Point-in-Time Restore, introduced in version 4.1" is fine. All other things equal, I try to choose the shorter wording.

This feature relies on the user having made one or more xref:tigergraph-server:backup-and-restore:differential-backups.adoc[differential backups].
Point-in-Time Restore relies on having full and differential backups in place.

> To understand the mechanism behind PITR, it’s vital to know how backups work:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand the mechanism behind point-in-time restore (PITR), it’s vital to know how backups work:
```
Unless an abbreviation is very common, always explain it before using it. (E.g., if you didn't know what PITR was before working on this ticket, then our readers won't know either.) The standard shorthand for defining an abbreviation is to give the full name, following by the abbreviation in parentheses.

  * Full Backup: A comprehensive snapshot of the entire database at a specific time. This backup serves as the baseline for all future recovery operations.

>   * Differential Backup: Captures changes made since the last full backup.

Reviewer: When you have a list like this, always use the same grammatical structure in each item.

- In your first item, you have a noun phrase (then followed by a second sentence).
- In your second item, you have a verb phrase (in the simple present tense).

== Use Cases
* Recovering from Data Corruption: If a database becomes corrupted due to hardware failures or software issues, PITR allows recovery to a state before the corruption.
* Undoing Accidental Changes: If a user accidentally deletes or modifies important data, PITR can revert the database to a point just before the error occurred.
* Maintaining Data Consistency During Testing: In testing environments, PITR allows reverting to a clean state after running tests that modify the database, ensuring a fresh starting point for future tests.
* Preserving Data State for Compliance and Audits: PITR helps maintain compliance with legal or regulatory requirements by allowing restoration of a previous database state to verify data, transactions, or records.

== Usage

> To perform a Point-in-Time Restore, use the following command:

Reviewer: In formal English, we do not capitalize words or phrases just because they are our topic of focus or important. We only capitallize it is is a so-called proper noun, e.g. if "Point-in-Time Restore" was a unique branded feature that only TigerGraph had.   But it's an industry-standard feature, so it isn't a brand name. (But people who are writing marketing material break this rule a lot.)

[console, gsql]
----
$ gadmin backup restore <timepoint_to_restore> --time-point
----

> [NOTE]:The <timepoint_to_restore> should be provided in timestamp format (e.g., 2024-06-01T14:24:31Z). The restore operation has a 1-second granularity, so any fractional seconds will be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]:The <timepoint_to_restore> should be provided in timestamp format (e.g., 2024-06-01T14:24:31Z). The restore operation accepts timestamps with 1-second granularity, so any fractional seconds will be ignored.
```
I tweaked the wording because even though the use can ask for a restore to an exact point, you see later in the page we make a disclaimer that we don't guarantee to achieve that granularity (maybe minutes instead of seconds). But definitely better than not havig PITR at all.

[NOTE]: Since the restore action will make any uncovered timepoints unavailable for restoration, it is recommended to ensure that all potential timepoints are covered by existing backups. If there is no backup available for the required timepoints, you can create one using the following command:
[console, gsql]
----
gadmin backup create <backup_tag> --incremental --base <full_backup_tag>
----
This new backup will cover the time range from the creation time of the specified full backup <full_backup_tag> to the current time.

== Limitations

.Point-in-time restore examples.
image::PIT_restore.png[]

> * GSQL Content: Point-in-time restore is designed primarily to restore data. For other stateful information, including schemas and RBAC settings, cannot be restored to the exact version at the provided time point. After a Point-in-time restore, these elements will reflect the version of the nearest differential backup used before the target restore time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* GSQL Content: Point-in-time restore is designed primarily to restore data. Other stateful information, including schemas and RBAC settings, cannot be restored to the exact version at the provided time point. After a Point-in-time restore, these elements will reflect the version of the nearest differential backup used before the target restore time.
```

In this example, the time range for backup `backup-2024-06-13T061939.131` is `[2024-06-13T06:19:39Z,2024-06-13T06:19:39Z]`, therefore, for a full backup is just a point. As for the incremental backup `backup-2024-06-13T063915.054`, its range is `[2024-06-13T06:19:39Z , 2024-06-13T06:39:15Z]`. `2024-06-13T06:35:00Z` is supported for it is covered by the time range `[2024-06-13T06:19:39Z , 2024-06-13T06:39:15Z]` of the backup `backup-2024-06-13T063915.054`. While, users can’t restore to the timepoint `2024-06-13T07:00:00Z` directly, for it is not in any backup's time range. However, if no restore was performed since `2024-06-13T07:00:00Z`, users may be able to create a new differential backup at right now and then restore to `2024-06-13T07:00:00Z`. 

[NOTE]: Since the restore action will make any uncovered timepoints unavailable for restoration, it is recommended to ensure that all potential timepoints are covered by existing backups. If there is no backup available for the required timepoints, you can create one using the following command:
[console, gsql]
----
gadmin backup create <backup_tag> --incremental --base <full_backup_tag>
----

> This new backup will cover the time range from the creation time of the specified full backup <full_backup_tag> to the current time.

Reviewer: Question for you, @anjaliIthapeTG :
Is this section telling you anything that isn't obvious? Do we need it?
It is obvious that you can't restore data that you never saved in a backup.

Author: @victorleeTG 

While it might seem obvious to some users, this section is intended to emphasize the importance of creating backups for those who may not be aware or might overlook this step. It helps ensure that users understand they can't recover data without having previously saved it, which is a critical point for anyone new to the process.

== Limitations

.Point-in-Time Restore examples.
image::PIT_restore.png[]

> * GSQL Content: The GSQL content, such as schemas and RBAC settings, cannot be restored to the exact version at the provided time point. After a Point-in-Time Restore, these elements will reflect the version of the nearest differential backup used.

Reviewer: 1. Point-in-time restore is designed primarily to restore _data_. For other stateful information, including schema and RBAC settings, ....
[@anjaliIthapeTG This limitation is consistent with other vendors'.}
2. It's not clear to me what "nearest" means. I think I asked about this in a previous review.  It is the nearest differential backup that comes BEFORE the target restore time, or AFTER the target restore time, or EITHER?

Author: @victorleeTG 

Based on the description based on one of the engineering ticket https://graphsql.atlassian.net/browse/DOC-2187 , It is BEFORE the target restore time.

> * Precision Window: Point-in-Time Restore operates with a precision window of a few minutes. To ensure optimal data consistency, it is recommended to restore to a time point at least 2-3 minutes before the timestamp of any unwanted changes.

Reviewer: no need to capitalize Point-in-Time Restore

* Coverage: Point-in-Time Restore cannot be performed for timestamps not covered by an existing differential backup. If the desired time point is not covered, a new differential backup must be created before performing the restore.

== Recommendations

To maximize the effectiveness and efficiency of PITR: Perform weekly full backups and daily differential backups. This ensures that the desired restore point is always covered and available when needed.

> 

Reviewer: I'm not happy with this recommendation. It is quite bold ("maximize") without exhibiting much understanding of the tradeoffs. I will send you an alternative idea.  It also does NOT "ensure... always covered".  The user is actually risking losing up to one day's work of data.

Author: @victorleeTG 

Temporarily deleted the recommendation
